[Music]
thank you
there is a reason why I use that analogy
it's not the first time and it basically
is me ribbing physicists because
physicists have been trying to come up
with a grand unifying Theory of
Everything for about for many years
three thousand years something like that
and we got all of ours in the space of
about a hundred years within the last
two centuries but so let's talk about
that then because the history is
fascinating that this unit of life which
is universal all life is made of cells
and there's a second rule that of cell
theory which we'll come to in a minute
but no one's actually seen one until
1673 something like that yes and what
was life made of before we saw that well
people lots of people a lot of theories
about life I mean
um the the idea the idea was that life
or flesh was continuous
um we were essentially slabs of meat
um but without anything underneath the
slabs make people just continuous slabs
of meat uh thinking slabs of meat but
slabs of meat nevertheless
um and
um it wasn't until uh Robert Hook
looked down through his microscope
um and found you know Hook Hook was an
incredible character
um so so there's so he comes from a
relatively poor family
gets a scholarship to Autumn College
um and then becomes an apprentice
um and what's amazing about hookah I I I
I I quote him and I say his his
his intelligence was
phosphorescent and elastic like a rubber
band that glows while it stretches
and that's partly because Hook was
hooked on to everything he was a
physicist there's a little bit of a joke
in that line he was actually
elastic he invented the laws of
elasticity he was a physicist he was a
chemist he was a as I I'll say a
biologist in architect a you know name
it he did it
um uh and he published a book called
micrographia in which he looked down his
microscope and started studying Small
Things starting with ants and pests and
things like that and in one of those
studies he cut a piece of cork and he
put it under the microscope and he
didn't see cells because the corpse was
dead but he saw the outlines of cell
walls and suddenly began to realize that
what seemed continuous a piece of cork
was in fact made up of what he called a
great many little boxes
um Now hook was it he didn't make much
of it he sort of Drew it and then sort
of went on to his other many thousand
Pursuits um there was a about a decade
later give or take there was a
a Dutch cloth Trader uh cloth Merchant
never trained in science had barely any
scientific vocabulary who decided to
invent another kind of microscope a
simple microscope to look at the quality
of thread
um the Netherlands was like a booming
Nexus of of cloth trade and he was in
delft and he decided that he was going
to look at the thread and then one day
he thought you know why don't I use this
microscope to look at a drop of water
and inside that drop of rain water he
found
hundreds of single cells we now think
protozoa but various kinds of animals he
called them animal cubes you have this
wonderful story about him you know he he
looked at his own semen and found sperm
which he called genital animal cues
um we can talk about that story in a
second but um and um went on and on and
on I mean he looked at you know
um he looked at human tissue and he
started writing letters to the to the
Royal Society where forsook was then the
president and realized and hook realized
that in fact what he had seen in these
little boxes was all over it was all
over the animal kingdom these little
swimming animal cues now this is before
cell theory is established this is just
people finding and looking at cells
um and um and that's how that's the
first time ever anyone ever saw a cell I
know you've seen you use one of the
microscopes that yeah yeah I mean you
didn't have to bring it up here but this
I mean the story behind the semen is is
that um he wrote all of these letters up
and he was ignored by the Royal Society
exactly yeah because he wasn't a gentle
a bewig's gentleman of Science and he
wrote in Dutch yeah and very
colloquially yeah yeah
um so he didn't publish his observations
of his own uh Seaman but he is the first
person to see his sperm it's just a line
the reason Sid's bringing this up is
because there's a line in his notes
which are unpublished in which he says
that he acquired this sample not by
sinfully defiling himself
but as a a natural byproduct of conjugal
coitus
which is so much worse
and and the second reason he's
mentioning this now is because a few
years ago I made a documentary in which
we went to the the van Leven hook Museum
and we also looked at a similar sample
which yes
um it was no one was expecting to talk
no no I mean it was on BBC four so no
one saw it anyway
um anyway so van Leven Hook is the first
person to see any cell and he sees
protests sort of amoeba and he sees his
sperm he sees blood cells he sees
bacterial platform between his his teeth
and he sends it off to the Royal Society
no one takes him seriously because he's
he writes in common Dutch
but Hook is the person that he persists
with and he he is the man who has the
Revelation and goes I think this guy
might be onto something yes that's right
so hook actually does publish his work
um he translates it he does publish his
work and
um and and lowenhook is a as I said he's
a really bizarre character because
having made this discovery
um he then refuses to let anyone look at
look through his microscopes
which is totally bizarre but he's
extraordinarily secretive because he
thinks that someone's gonna steal this
his his microscope um he's made he makes
about 500 of them if you've ever had a
chance there's one in Cambridge there
are many in in the Living Hope Museum
but they're really very beautiful
they're small little plates with lenses
that he would make himself and the
lenses are tight they don't look like
you when you think of a microscope you
think of the thing you look down like
that but they're they're looking at
little things and you hold them up to
the Sun and you have to put a drop of
water in front of it I made one a very
bad one one but uh it was coveted and I
had nothing else to do except
yes it did work actually after a lot of
stuff I mean these days it's easier
because you can uh you can order the
plate and you can order a plate with a
you know with that with with the hole in
it and you can order the lens so it's
it's why I didn't have to blow us and
blow my own glass and grind my own Glass
Lens because the lens itself the lens I
could nerd out on this and we mustn't
because I'm an Optics nerd but it's like
a little peppercorn it's round it's
spherical it's it has to be very it has
to be very accurately made
um it has to be ground to Perfection
um because otherwise you get aberrations
and you can't see anything but anyway
we'll that's the Optics we said I mean
we could we could we could just talk
about the history
um for easily for now because it is such
a it's it's really the birth of biology
and it's the it's foundational to the
the Royal Society and this is we're in
what was Gresham College here which is
very closely associated with that anyway
we could talk about that for hours and
we won't because we need to move on but
so van damenhoek sees these cells for
the first time and it begins to develop
it turns into a The Next Century or so
into what becomes what we've described
as the sort of one of the grand unifying
theories of biology that all life is
made of cells but it takes a weird
dinner party
for for this this unification to happen
with a bunch of odd characters which is
which you describe brilliant beautifully
in introduction what what happens so
there are two students uh sliden and
Schwann
um and they're both unusual characters
one of them is a lawyer turned botanist
um and he's the lawyer in bodies because
he hates law he tries to shoot himself
uh but he misses
um and so uh that's not funny but it's
just at the dinner party he's got a
massive scar on his head when he invents
cell biology yes so he's the and
um and and
um and and then and then a zoologists
and what what sliding uh he's he's
looking at
um he's what they both work in Germany
under Johannes Miller
um and he's been looking at the
development of plants as a botanist and
he's been seeing some commonalities but
the most important commonality which
will which he will state later is that
um when he sees the plant developing he
sees them forming through cells he sees
the act the process of of formation of
an organism through cells
um and that this dinner party uh in
Berlin
and uh the the zoologists says well wait
a second I've been looking at the growth
of animals and basically tadpoles
um and I too
um have been seeing the the formation of
the organism through cells and so they
they sort of drag each other to the
microscope and very soon they realize
that they've stumbled on a common
phenomenon that seems to link the Plant
World and the animal world and that is
that both animals and plants are formed
through cells and so they make the first
tenets of of Cell Biology that all the
animals are formed animals and plants
are formed through cells and in fact
that all all organisms are are are are
made of uh are made of cells so so they
lay down the basis of cell biological
Theory the universality lots of people
had seen cells before 11 hockey talked
about what we talked about but no one
had made the incredibly audacious claim
that in fact across the entire animal
and plant and other kingdoms
that everything was a cell every living
creature was made of cells and so that's
the first part of cell theory cell
theory comes in in two parts the first
is that all life is made of cells and
then the second part comes a few years
later and it also is based in Germany
it's based out out of Berlin but another
amazing story about how so where cells
come from because if all life is made of
cells and these these people like
Schwann and schweiden and others are
looking at how they develop how
organisms develop embryology is a big
thing at that time as it is today
but there was a question of where cells
come from in the first place and for the
previous 2000 years
there was an assumption that they just
sprang out of nowhere that they
spontaneously generated and that turns
out to be not true right so so now we
move a little bit further ahead in time
um young 30 odd year old pathologist in
Germany is studying cell cell biologies
particularly these are pathologist
particularly interested in
leukemia and so he
um he picks up one worked on my others
and he makes the third claim uh or
perhaps a second big claim which is that
um all cells come from other cells now
again
all of us know this seems very obvious
today but there was a huge debate uh
going on at that point of time about
where cells came from and even schleiden
uh the inventor of cell theory thought
that cells sort of crystallized out of
some vital fluid
um there's a theory called vitalism
um and in fact some people still believe
it uh that in fact there's something
special that we're not just sort of
chemical soups uh walking around there's
something special in our chemical soup
there's some special seasoning that
makes uh live life and
and what workout was saying is in some
ways he was saying there's no special
seasoning it's life comes from Life
cells come from cells and that's the way
we grow we grow out from a single cell
by that by the division of that cell
into two cells into four cells into
eight and so forth and and and
until we get the several trillion cells
that that make up a make up a make up a
body so
um and and in Latin that's on the
cellular acellular from cells come from
cells very radical in its time because
of this these countervailing theories
that they of spontaneous generation
vitalism and and
Etc
um
but then workout matures as a as a
physician scientist
um
um and I the book is almost dedicated to
him I like the word almost dedicated
it's like uh um he sort of just missed
the mark but anyway
um and he kind of Nicks the idea a
little bit off someone else didn't he
yes
is an idea that that actually existed
before him
um in other work but he he sort of
brought it out of history and and and
and stamped it but the next two ideas
are absolutely his
um and they're also foundational
um the next idea is that all uh human
physiology is the consequence of
cellular physiology
um now let's pause and and contemplate
that idea for a second this is in 1840
something or the other and here is
someone saying that everything that we
are and do our bodies do
is a consequence of cells doing
something the fact that we can regulate
salt and water the fact that our brains
think the fact that you are and I are
having this conversation it's all a
consequence of cells doing something to
enable that to happen
um you know the environment Behavior
chance life happens around it but
ultimately it has to go down to the cell
to be the actor of it
um you know the fact that there's blood
rushing through our veins and and
arteries it it there's a consequence of
that and that is that that you know
oxygen is being delivered
um and and nutrients are you know waste
products are being cleared so this very
central idea all normal physiology is a
consequence of cellular physiology is
also radical
um and then he just turns that idea on
its head it's the mirror image and he
argues that if that's the case then all
disease so he gets even more radical now
he argues that all disease must be a
disease that is an aberration or
dysfunction of cells so all of a sudden
we have a theory of how the body is made
what makes the body
how cells are born
how physiology occurs and how and why
disease occurs and with that you get a
complete new universe as it were of
biology and medicine and cell biology
Etc these are some of the biggest ideas
that anyone's ever had in biology along
with natural selection and Universal
genetics and that's why we sing their
praises but I think it is so radical
because if you think about you think
about how we now know you know and we've
known for for decades but not centuries
that we start as a single
uh cell an egg that's being fertilized
by a sperm the biggest cell in the human
body and the smallest cell in the human
body combine and that's where all Life
Starts but the implications of the first
part or the second part of cell theory
that all cells come from other cells
is a really brain scrambling concept
because it means that that egg cell came
from another cell which means you can
trace the lineage of that through your
mind yeah now you're asking a very
interesting question yeah and then it
means you can go back all the way
through the history of life on Earth
that when you cut your finger
or when you get a bleeding gum or you
graze your knee and the cells that grow
to repair that damage they are part of a
lineage which starts four billion years
ago and is unbroken and that's
incredible rates if you really think
about that idea is unbroken The Unbroken
lineage in other words you could if you
could draw that infinite tree
that infinite tree of trillions of cells
that we all have in common plus the
other trillion that are in bacteria plus
the other trillion that more than a
trillion etc etc etc if you were to take
that entire lineage tree and wind the
clock backwards and wind it backwards
and wind it backwards and wind it
backwards you would end up with one
so
the mother of all life
that was very present pause I know I
just just wanted to let that land
because it is number it's the biggest
idea that there is it is The Greatest
Story Ever Told we call that cell Luca
the last Universal common ancestor and
we think it started well I I I'm part of
a branch of science that thinks that it
started at the bottom of the ocean
possibly in hydrothermal vents about 3.9
billion years ago but from Luca which
divided and divided for the next two
billion years for the next four the next
two billion years after that and when
you
do anything those the second the other
the third part of of what you're saying
any interaction you have
with the rest of the universe is
modulated by a lineage which started
four billion years ago these are big big
thoughts and and I think
we don't talk about them much do we yes
I think I think we uh I think it's
partly because the the mind boggles a
little bit uh at the thought
um but it's but they're true I mean from
that there's been lots of attempts to
create and as you know there are lots of
competing theories about where the the
the Luca was existed or was born
um or how
um their theories about
um the most I think the most accepted
theory is that
um is that wherever it was whether in
the hydrothermal event or in or in clay
uh layers of clay
um there was uh the the birth of of a
molecule
um probably RNA as far as we know
and which had either by itself or as a
partner the capacity to duplicate it
itself
um but that is not life because as I
explained in the book if if the uh if
the original molecule and its duplicator
um drifted away then that would be the
end of life it would be like lovers
who'd been lost forever and none of us
would exist in nor would the Mona Lisa
there would be no there would be nothing
so these two molecules or whether it was
one molecule is a question mark
um had to create a membrane around
themselves and that membrane is made out
of fat so they had to be fat molecules
and what's amazing is that in
Laboratories like Jack shostak's lab and
other labs you can actually make these
Proto cells you can create artificially
a a blob of fat which resembles in many
ways the membranes that our cells have
very primitively and if you keep adding
more and more fat molecules to them as
they absorb more fat molecules these
protocells divide
now these are completely lifeless
remember they have no none of the
functions of Life they don't respire
they don't but they have one quality of
life which is that they can they have
autonomous cell division they can they
can split themselves and if you keep
adding more fat then those two will
split themselves further
now if you enclose that or or if you
take that and enclose within that box
a molecule that can duplicate itself and
Carries information you all of a sudden
begin to again this walk through the
thought for a moment with me you you've
gotta you've got a membrane you've got a
little box and inside that box you've
placed a machine that can duplicate
itself makes it make another copy of
itself so that when the Box divides that
piece of information also divides and
now you can encode that piece of
information and that piece of
information can start making things it
can start doing things it can make more
copies of itself and so forth and now
you begin to start thinking is that life
and we're sort of at the edge of of of
what might be Luca or or something and
whatever it happened
that's one prominent Theory there are
many other theories that we we won't
talk about but yeah no I mean I honestly
we could spend another hour talking
about that but
I mean I said